---
title: ALP-aca v1.1
date: 2025-10-31
authors: [Alpaca]
categories: [updates]
math: true
---

We have released the vesrion v1.1 of ALP-aca, with some exciting new features!

## Projections for displaced ALP searches in LHCb with Downstream tracks

The new Downstream algorithm [[Comput.Softw.Big Sci. 9 (2025) 1, 10]](https://inspirehep.net/literature/2901419) at LHCb allows to reconstruct tracks that do not start at the VELO, which can improve the sensitivity to long-lived particles such as ALPs [[Eur.Phys.J.C 84 (2024) 6, 608]](https://inspirehep.net/literature/2739807). We have performed sensitivity studies using [SensCalc](https://zenodo.org/records/8353681) to obtains projections for the bounds of different processes as a function of the mass and proper lifetime of the ALP:

- $K_S^0 \to \pi^0 a (\to e^+ e^-)$
- $K_S^0 \to \pi^0 a (\to \mu^+ \mu^-)$
- $B^+ \to K^+ a (\to e^+ e^-)$
- $B^+ \to K^+ a (\to \mu^+ \mu^-)$
- $B^+ \to K^+ a (\to \gamma \pi^+ \pi^-)$
- $B^+ \to K^+ a (\to \pi^0 \pi^+ \pi^-)$
- $B^0 \to K^{*0} a (\to e^+ e^-)$
- $B^0 \to K^{*0} a (\to \mu^+ \mu^-)$
- $B^0 \to K^{*0} a (\to \gamma \pi^+ \pi^-)$
- $B^0 \to K^{*0} a (\to \pi^0 \pi^+ \pi^-)$
- $D_s^+ \to K^+ a (\to \mu^+ \mu^-)$

Additionally, we also have projections for T tracks, that is, tracks that are reconstructed using the SciFi detectors:

- $K_S^0 \to \pi^0 a (\to e^+ e^-)$
- $K_S^0 \to \pi^0 a (\to \mu^+ \mu^-)$
- $B^+ \to K^+ a (\to e^+ e^-)$
- $B^+ \to K^+ a (\to \mu^+ \mu^-)$
- $B^0 \to K^{*0} a (\to e^+ e^-)$
- $B^0 \to K^{*0} a (\to \mu^+ \mu^-)$

Since they are projections, they are only used for the analysis if the argument `exclude_projections=False` is introduced in `get_chi2()`

## New recast of $B^+ \to K^+ \nu \bar{\nu}$ at Belle II

The Belle II experiment found an excess of events in $B^+ \to K^+ \nu\bar\nu$, which can be interpreted as a two-body decay $B^+ \to K^+ a$ where the ALP escapes the detector with $m_a \sim 2\mathrm{GeV}$. A new theoretical analysis, [arXiv:2510.18953 [hep-ph]](https://arxiv.org/abs/arXiv:2510.18953), has refined the reconstruction of ITA events, and showed that it is possible to disentangle new physics effects in the two-body and three-body processes.

## "BC" benchmarks

We have implemented the three ALP portal benchmarks defined in [[J.Phys.G 47 (2020) 1, 010501]](https://inspirehep.net/literature/1717494)

- **BC9** (photo-phillic ALP):

$$
\mathcal{L}_\mathrm{BC9} (\Lambda = 1\mathrm{TeV}) = \frac{g_{a\gamma\gamma}}{4} a F_{\mu\nu}\tilde{F}^{\mu\nu}
$$

Note that at the scale $\Lambda = 1\mathrm{TeV}$, electroweak symmetry is restored, and thus it is not possible to generate ALP couplings exclusively to photons. We have chosen to approximate the BC9 benchmark as a $U(1)_Y$-phillic scenario with

$$
c_B(\Lambda) = \frac{\pi}{\alpha_\mathrm{em}}g_{a\gamma\gamma} f_a
$$

which in turn also describes interactions of the ALP with to $Z$ bosons and with one photon and one $Z$:

$$
g_{aZZ} = \frac{s_w^2}{c_w^2} g_{a\gamma\gamma}\qquad g_{a\gamma Z} = -2\frac{s_w}{c_w} g_{a\gamma\gamma}
$$

- **BC10** (fermion-phillic ALP):

$$
\mathcal{L}_\mathrm{BC10} (\Lambda = 1\mathrm{TeV}) = \frac{g_Y}{2v}\partial_\mu a \sum_f \bar{f}\gamma^\mu \gamma_5 f
$$

where the matching condition is

$$
c_{f_R}^{ij}(\Lambda) = - c_{f_L}^{ij}(\Lambda) = \frac{g_Y}{2}\frac{f_a}{v}\delta^{ij}
$$

Note that, even though the couplings are purely axial at the scale $\Lambda$, the runnning of the left-handed and right-handed couplings is different above the electroweak scale, and consequently a small vectorial coupling will be generated.
- **BC11** (gluon-phllic ALP):

$$
\mathcal{L}_\mathrm{BC11} (\Lambda = 1\mathrm{TeV}) = \frac{1}{4f_G} a G_{\mu\nu}^a\tilde{G}^{\mu\nu,a}
$$

The matching condition is

$$
c_G(\Lambda) = \frac{\pi}{\alpha_s}\frac{f_a}{f_G}
$$

These benchmarks are implemented as `alpaca.benchmarks.BC9()`, `alpaca.benchmarks.BC10()` and `alpaca.benchmarks.BC11()` respectively. Each benchmark takes two arguments, the coupling ($g_{a\gamma\gamma}$ in $\mathrm{GeV}^{-1}$, $g_Y$ is dimensionless and $f_G$ in $\mathrm{GeV}$) and $f_a$, and returns the `ALPcouplings` at the scale $\Lambda=1\mathrm{TeV}$:

```python
from alpaca.benchmarks import BC10

bc10_coupling = BC10()(gY = 1e-3, fa=1e3)
```

## Scans over parameter space

The new module `alpaca.scan` makes 2-dimensional scans over the ALP parameter space even easier!

The scan is performed over objects defined by the class `alpaca.scan.Axis`. There are three types of `Axis`:

- Main axis: Each scan must contain exactly one main `x` axis and one `y` axis, which define the size of the scanning grid.
- Functional axis: The values of this axis are calculated as a function (e. g. a Python lambda) of the corresponding main axis.
- Dependent axis: The user can provide any arbitrary value for this axis, as long as it has the same dimension as the corresponding main axis.

The `Axis` object takes the following arguments:

- `values`: For main and dependent axis, a list or numpy array of numerical values (typically created with `np.linspace` or `np.logspace`). For functional axis, a function that takes a float as argument and returns another float.
- `axis`: For main axes either `x` or `y`. For functional axes, either `x_func` or `y_func`. For dependent axes, either `x_dep` or `y_dep`.
- `tex`: $\TeX$ string to be used as the label of the axis when plotted.
- `name` and `units`: Strings for the name and units of the axis. At the moment, only used by interactive plots (see below).

As an example, the following code defines a main axis corresponding to $f_a$ ranging from $10^3\mathrm{GeV}$ to $10^8\mathrm{GeV}$, and a functional axis for the UV matching scale $\Lambda = 4 \pi f_a$:

```python
from alpaca.scan import Axis
import numpy as np

ax_fa = Axis(
  values = np.logspace(3, 8, 100),
  axis = 'y',
  tex = r'$f_a\ [\mathrm{GeV}]$',
  name = r'f<sub>a</sub>',
  units = 'GeV'
)

ax_lambda = Axis(
  values = lambda fa: 4*np.pi*fa,
  axis = 'y_func',
  tex = r'$\Lambda\ [\mathrm{GeV}]$',
  name = '&#923;',
  units = 'GeV'
)
```

Now we are ready to define our scan with `alpaca.scan.Scan`. Its arguments are:

- `model`: An object of either `alpaca.uvmodels.ModelBase` (or its subclasses), or of `alpaca.ALPcouplings`, or `alpaca.benchmarks.Benchmark` (for the new BC benchmarks). For the UV models and benchmarks, it is possible to scan over the parameters of the model.
- `ma`: Mass of the ALP, in GeV. It can be a float (if the mass is fixed for the scan) or an `Axis`.
- `fa`: $f_a$ of the ALP, in GeV. It can be a float (if it is fixed for the scan) or an `Axis`. It is ignored for benchmarks.
- `lambda_scale`: Matching scale between the UV theory and the ALP-EFT, in GeV (only for UV models). It can be a float (if it is fixed for the scan) or an `Axis`.
- `mu_scale`: Final scale for the running of the ALP couplings, in GeV. If set to `None` (default value), the running is not pre-computed, and will be performed automatically when calculating observables. It can be a float (if it is fixed for the scan) or an `Axis`.
- `brdark`: Model-dependent branching ratio of the ALP decays into dark sectors, by default set to 0. It can be a float (if it is fixed for the scan) or an `Axis`.
- `model_pars`: Dictionary that contains the values of the parameters for the UV model. The keys are the model parameters (as obtained e.g. by the method `.model_parameters()` of each model, or `gagg` for BC9, `gY` for BC10, `fG` for BC11), and the corresponding values are a float (if it is fixed for the scan) or an `Axis`.

```python
from alpaca.scan import Axis, Scan
from alpaca.uvmodels import QED_DFSZ
import numpy as np

ax_ma = Axis(
  values = np.logspace(-2, 1, 100),
  axis = 'x',
  tex = r'$m_a\ [\mathrm{GeV}]$',
  name = r'm<sub>a</sub>',
  units = 'GeV'
)

scan_qeddfsz = Scan(
  model = QED_DFSZ,
  ma = ax_ma,
  fa = ax_fa,
  lambda_scale = ax_lambda,
  mu_scale = 10.1,
  model_pars = {QED_DFSZ.model_pars()[0]: np.arctan(1)}
)
```

The method `.compute_grid()` of the scan obtains the `ALPcouplings` for all points of the grid, performing their running if necessary. The values of the couplings are stored, so future calls to `.compute_grid()` do not compute them again.

The scan also has the following methods:

- `.decay_width`
- `.branching_ratio`
- `.cross_section`
- `.meson_mixing`
- `.alp_channels_decay_widths`
- `.alp_channels_branching_ratios`
- `.get_chi2`

They work like their usual conterparts, except they do not take the arguments for `ma`, `couplings`, `fa` and `br_dark`. So, for example, if we want to use the previously defined `Scan` to compute the values of $\mathrm{BR}(B^+\to K^+ \mu^+ \mu^-)$ at each point of the grid:

```python
br_bkmumu = scan_qeddfsz.branching_ratio('B+ -> K+ mu mu', integrator='no_rge')
```

`Axis` objects can also be used to specify the $x$ and $y$ values in `exclusionplot` and $x$ values in `alp_channels_plot`.

## Interactive plots

Is your plot too cluttered and do you want to hide some of the bounds? Do you want to zoom in a region of the parameter space? Or simply make your talks more lively? We introduce interactive plots powered by plotly!

```python
from alpaca.plotting.plotly import exclusionplot
```

The syntax is the same as the `matplotlib` version of the plots, but with new optional arguments: `xvar`, `yvar`, `xunits` and `yunits`. These are four strings that contain the name and units for the `x` and `y` coordinates when hovering over the plot. Sadly, latex is not supported for this hover text, but some HTML formatting is possible (e.g. superindices with `<sup>` `</sup>`, subindices with `<sub>` `</sub>`, and greek characters with unicode, like `&#946;` for &#946;).

(Note: on some notebooks, for example in VSCode, it might be necessary to run some initialization routines contained in `alpaca.plotting.plotly.prepare_nb()` to properly display the interactive plots)

```python
from alpaca.plotting.plotly import exclusionplot, prepare_nb

prepare_nb()

fig = exclusionplot(
  x_tanbeta,
  1/y_fa,
  chi2_global,
  r'$\tan\beta$',
  r'$1/f_a\ [\mathrm{GeV}^{-1}]$',
  'QED-DFSZ ALP',
  xvar = r'tan &#946;',
  yvar = r'1/f<sub>a</sub>',
  yunits = r'GeV<sup>-1</sup>'
)

fig.show()
```

The figure can be exported to html as

```python
fig.write_html('qed_dfsz.html', include_mathjax='cdn', include_plotlyjs='cdn', full_html=True)
```

The two "include" options are used to load the required javascript libraries from the web. Changing to `True` instead of `cdn` includes the libraries inside the html output, increasing significantly its file size. If `full_html = False`, the output is just a `<div>` HTML element that can be embedded in larger files.

It is also possible to use ALP-aca to generate HTML pages with templates

```python
from alpaca.plotting.plotly import save_html

save_html(fig, 'qed_dfsz.html', title = 'Web page title', template='basic')
```

At the moment, only the `basic` template is available.

## Installation of optional dependencies

The plotting backends, `matplotlib` and `plotly`, are not included as depencencies of ALP-aca, but now they can be installed as optional dependencies. To install with `matplotlib`

```bash
pip3 install alpaca-ALPs[matplotlib]
```

with `plotly`

```bash
pip3 install alpaca-ALPs[plotly]
```

and with both

```bash
pip3 install alpaca-ALPs[matplotlib,plotly]
```
